[DOC-124] Categories for YB-Voyager CLI (#19325)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: docs/content/preview/yugabyte-voyager/reference/bulk-data-load/import-data-file.md

| --file-opts <string> | **[Deprecated]** Comma-separated string options for CSV file format. <br>Options:<ul><li>`escape_char` - escape character</li><li>`quote_char` - character used to quote the values</li></ul>default: double quotes (") for both escape and quote characters<br>Note that escape_char and quote_char are only valid and required for CSV file format.<br>Example: `--file-opts "escape_char=\",quote_char=\""` or `--file-opts 'escape_char=",quote_char="'` |
| --null-string | String that represents null values in the datafile. (default: `""` (empty string) for CSV, and `'\N'` for text.)<br>Example: `yb-voyager import data file ... --null-string 'NULL'` |
| --file-table-map \<filename1:tablename1\> | Comma-separated mapping between the files in `--data-dir` argument to the corresponding table in the database. You can import multiple files in one table either by providing one `<fileName>:<tableName>` entry for each file OR by passing a glob expression in place of the file name.<br>Example: `--file-table-map 'fileName1:tableName,fileName2:tableName'` OR `--file-table-map 'fileName*:tableName'`. |

> | --format <format> | One of `'csv'` or `'text'` format of the data file. (default: 'csv')<br>Example: `yb-voyager import data file ... --format 'text'` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| --format <format> | Format of the data file. One of `csv` or `text`. (default: csv)<br>Example: `yb-voyager import data file ... --format text` |
```

> | --has-header | For `csv` datafiles, use this argument if the datafile has a header with column names for the table. (default: false).<br>Example: `yb-voyager import data file ... --format 'csv' --has-header` OR `yb-voyager import data file ... --format 'csv' --has-header=true` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| --has-header | For `csv` datafiles, use this argument if the datafile has a header with column names for the table. (default: false).<br>Example: `yb-voyager import data file ... --format csv --has-header` OR `yb-voyager import data file ... --format csv --has-header=true` |
```

| [--target-ssl-cert](../../yb-voyager-cli/#ssl-connectivity) <certificateName> | Name of the certificate which is part of the SSL `<cert,key>` pair. |
| [--target-ssl-key](../../yb-voyager-cli/#ssl-connectivity) <keyName> | Name of the key which is part of the SSL `<cert,key>` pair. |
| [--target-ssl-crl](../../yb-voyager-cli/#ssl-connectivity) <path> | Path to a file containing the SSL certificate revocation list (CRL).|
| [--target-ssl-mode](../../yb-voyager-cli/#ssl-connectivity) <SSLmode> | One of `disable`, `allow`, `prefer`(default), `require`, `verify-ca`, or `verify-full`. |
| [--target-ssl-root-cert](../../yb-voyager-cli/#ssl-connectivity) <path> | Path to a file containing SSL certificate authority (CA) certificate(s). |
| --verbose | Display extra information in the output. (default: false) |
| -y, --yes  | Answer yes to all prompts during the export schema operation. |

## Examples

The following examples use the `--data-dir` argument along with `--file-table-map` argument and contextually differ based on whether the data is imported from local disk or cloud storage options.

{{< tabpane text=true >}}

 {{% tab header="CSV" %}}

> Import data for CSV files using `import data file` command by providing the argument `--format 'csv'` in the command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Import data from CSV files using `import data file` by providing the argument `--format csv` in the command.
```

### Import data file from local disk

The `--data-dir` argument is a path to the local directory where all the CSV files are present, and the `--file-table-map` argument provides a comma-separated mapping between each CSV file in `--data-dir` to the corresponding table in the database (you can mention case-sensitive table names as well, for example: `--file-table-map 'foo.csv:"Foo"'`); each file has a header, delimiter as `','` (default), escape and quote character as `'"'`(default).

```sh
yb-voyager import data file --export-dir '/dir/export-dir' \

>         --target-db-host 'x.x.x.x' \

Reviewer 2: pls change all the occurrences of these in the examples - 
1. `--target-db-host 'x.x.x.x'` to `--target-db-host '127.0.0.1'`,
2. `--export-dir '/dir/export-dir'` to `--export-dir /dir/export-dir`
3.  `--data-dir '/dir/data-dir'` to `--data-dir /dir/data-dir`

> The `--data-dir` argument is a path to the local directory where all the CSV files are present, and the `--file-table-map` argument provides a comma-separated mapping between each CSV file in `--data-dir` to the corresponding table in the database (you can mention case-sensitive table names as well, for example: `--file-table-map 'foo.csv:"Foo"'`); each file has a header, delimiter as `','` (default), escape and quote character as `'"'`(default).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `--data-dir` argument is a path to the local directory where all the CSV files are present, and the `--file-table-map` argument provides a comma-separated mapping between each CSV file in `--data-dir` to the corresponding table in the database (you can mention case-sensitive table names as well, for example, `--file-table-map 'foo.csv:"Foo"'`); each file has a header, delimiter as `','` (default), and escape and quote character as `'"'` (default).
```

        --target-db-user 'ybvoyager' \
        --target-db-password 'password' \
        --target-db-name 'target_db' \
        --target-db-schema 'target_schema' \
        --data-dir /dir/data-dir \
        --file-table-map 'accounts.csv:accounts,transactions.csv:transactions' \
        --format 'csv' \
        --has-header=true
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```
yb-voyager import data file --export-dir /dir/export-dir \
        --target-db-host 127.0.0.1 \
        --target-db-user ybvoyager \
        --target-db-password 'password' \
        --target-db-name target_db \
        --target-db-schema target_schema \
        --data-dir /dir/data-dir \
        --file-table-map 'accounts.csv:accounts,transactions.csv:transactions' \
        --format csv \
        --has-header=true
```

```sh
yb-voyager import data file --export-dir /dir/export-dir \
        --target-db-host 127.0.0.1 \
        --target-db-user ybvoyager \
        --target-db-password 'password' \
        --target-db-name target_db \
        --target-db-schema target_schema \
        --data-dir https://admin.blob.core.windows.net/air-world/data \
        --file-table-map 'airlines.csv:airlines,airports.csv:airports,flights.csv:flights,passengers.csv:passengers,bookings.csv:booking' \
        --format csv \
        --delimiter '#' \
        --null-string 'null' \
        --escape-char '%' \
        --quote-char '"'
```

### Incremental loading

Multiple files can be imported in one table (for example, `foo1.csv:foo,foo2.csv:foo` or `foo*.csv:foo`).

> The `--data-dir` argument is a path to the local directory where all the CSV files are present, and the `--file-table-map` argument provides a comma-separated mapping between each CSV file in `--data-dir` to the corresponding table in the database, where each file has a header, delimiter as `','` (default), escape and quote character as `'"'`(default).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `--data-dir` argument is a path to the local directory where all the CSV files are present, and the `--file-table-map` argument provides a comma-separated mapping between each CSV file in `--data-dir` to the corresponding table in the database, where each file has a header, delimiter as `','` (default), and escape and quote character as `'"'`(default).
```

Example for each file entry in --file-table-map (`foo1.csv:foo,foo2.csv:foo`) is as follows:

```sh
yb-voyager import data file --export-dir /dir/export-dir \
        --target-db-host 127.0.0.1 \
        --target-db-user ybvoyager \
        --target-db-password 'password' \
        --target-db-name target_db \
        --target-db-schema target_schema \
        --data-dir /dir/data-dir \
        --file-table-map 'accounts.csv:accounts,transactions1.csv:transactions,transactions2.csv:transactions' \
        --format csv \
        --has-header=true
```

Example for glob expression of files in --file-table-map (`foo*.csv:foo`) is as follows:

```sh
yb-voyager import data file --export-dir /dir/export-dir \
        --target-db-host 127.0.0.1 \
        --target-db-user ybvoyager \
        --target-db-password 'password' \
        --target-db-name target_db \
        --target-db-schema target_schema \
        --data-dir /dir/data-dir \
        --file-table-map 'accounts.csv:accounts,transactions*.csv:transactions' \
        --format csv \
        --has-header=true
```

{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab header="Text" %}}

> Import data for text files using `import data file` by providing the argument --format 'text' in the command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Import data from text files using `import data file` by providing the argument `--format text` in the command.
```

        --data-dir /dir/data-dir \
        --file-table-map 'accounts.txt:accounts,transactions.txt:transactions' \
        --format text
```

### Import data file from AWS S3

The `--data-dir` argument is the AWS S3 URL of the data directory on the S3 bucket where all the text files are present, and the `--file-table-map` argument provides a comma-separated mapping between each text file in `--data-dir` to the corresponding table in the database, where each file has `','` (comma) as the delimiter, and null string as `'NULL'` for null values as demonstrated in the following command:

```sh
yb-voyager import data file --export-dir /dir/export-dir \
        --target-db-host 127.0.0.1 \
        --target-db-user ybvoyager \
        --target-db-password 'password' \
        --target-db-name target_db \
        --target-db-schema target_schema \
        --data-dir s3://social-media/data \
        --file-table-map 'posts.txt:post,comments.txt:comments,profiles.txt:profiles,likes.txt:likes,messages.txt:messages,followers.txt:followers' \
        --format text \
        --delimiter ',' \
        --null-string 'NULL'
```

### Import data file from GCS

> The `--data-dir` argument is the GCS URL of the data directory on the GCS bucket where all the text files are present, and the `--file-table-map` argument provides a comma-separated mapping of each text file in `--data-dir` to the corresponding table in the database (you can mention case-sensitive table names as well), where each file has delimiter as `'-'`(hyphen character) as demonstrated in the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `--data-dir` argument is the GCS URL of the data directory on the GCS bucket where all the text files are present, and the `--file-table-map` argument provides a comma-separated mapping of each text file in `--data-dir` to the corresponding table in the database (you can mention case-sensitive table names as well), where each file has delimiter as `'-'` (hyphen) as demonstrated in the following command:
```

```sh
yb-voyager import data file --export-dir /dir/export-dir \
        --target-db-host '127.0.0.1' \
        --target-db-user 'ybvoyager' \
        --target-db-password 'password' \
        --target-db-name 'target_db' \
        --target-db-schema 'target_schema' \
        --data-dir 'https://admin.blob.core.windows.net/weather-forecast/data' \
        --file-table-map 'locations.txt:locations,weather.txt:weather,data.txt:data,forecasts.txt:forecasts' \
        --format 'text' \
        --delimiter '#' \
        --null-string 'null'
```

### Incremental loading

Multiple files can be imported in one table (for example, `foo1.csv:foo,foo2.csv:foo` or `foo*.csv:foo`).

The `--data-dir` argument is a path to the local directory where all the text files are present, and the `--file-table-map` argument provides a comma-separated mapping between each text file in `--data-dir` to the corresponding table in the database  where each file has a header, delimiter as `'|'` (pipe character).

> Example for each file entry in --file-table-map (`foo1.csv:foo,foo2.csv:foo`) is as follows:

Reviewer 2: `foo1.txt:foo,foo2.txt:foo`

```sh
yb-voyager import data file --export-dir /dir/export-dir \
        --target-db-host '127.0.0.1' \
        --target-db-user 'ybvoyager' \
        --target-db-password 'password' \
        --target-db-name 'target_db' \
        --target-db-schema 'target_schema' \
        --data-dir '/dir/academy-data' \
        --file-table-map 'students1.txt:students,students2.txt:students,students3.txt:students,courses.txt:courses,instructors1.txt:instructors,instructors2.txt:instructors,enrollments.txt:enrollments,grades.txt:grades' \
        --format 'text' \
        --delimiter '|'
```

Example for glob expression of files in --file-table-map (`foo*.csv:foo`) is as follows:

> 

Reviewer 2: `foo*.txt:foo`

| --verbose | Display extra information in the output. (default: false) |
| -y, --yes  | Answer yes to all prompts during the export schema operation. |

<!-- To do : document the following arguments with description
| --continue-on-error |
| --enable-upsert |
| --target-endpoints |
| --use-public-ip | -->

## Examples

The following examples use the `--data-dir` argument along with `--file-table-map` argument and contextually differ based on whether the data is imported from local disk or cloud storage options.

{{< tabpane text=true >}}

 {{% tab header="CSV" %}}

Import data for CSV files using `import data file` command by providing the argument `--format 'csv'` in the command.

### Import data file from local disk

The `--data-dir` argument is a path to the local directory where all the CSV files are present, and the `--file-table-map` argument provides a comma-separated mapping between each CSV file in `--data-dir` to the corresponding table in the database (you can mention case-sensitive table names as well); each file has a header, delimiter as ',' (default), escape and quote character as '"'(default).

> 

Author: @priyanshi-yb - you can mention case-sensitive table names as well, refer second example on how to pass- for this can we just include an example instead. and the example would be ??

> 

Reviewer 2: example- `--file-table-map 'orders.csv:"Orders",products.csv:"Products"'`

> 

Reviewer 2: example - `--file-table-map 'foo.csv:"Foo"'`
